hi everyone just quick I wanted to say
that this is actually gonna be the last
nailing science on my channel don't
worry though
he's not my boss no designs ever it's
just that my channel has grown so much
since we posted the very first nailing
science video it doesn't seem like the
most appropriate place for it anymore
because this is such a space focused
channel so instead it's gonna be moving
to a channel that Mikael is involved
with called Oxford Sparks yeah which is
the University of Oxford's science
engagement place ie the place where
you'll find all the cool science
happening at the University of Oxford so
we'll have nailing science and a bunch
of other things besides link below to
check that out yeah I think it just made
sense to move it to there cuz that's the
place where a lot of discussions between
researchers happen anyway so it makes
sense to put a broader discussion with
researchers on a childhood specifically
designed for that but don't worry it's
not the last seven early science we are
in CERN right now in Geneva in
Switzerland so you can probably guess
what our next researchers topic that
they study is and so look out for that
in a couple weeks
over on the Oxford's back channel hello
scientifically accurate nail art lovers
and welcome to another episode of
nailing the science with me after
physicist dr. bet he's noticed me we
like compiler just doctor Michaela
Langston banks on this week's a special
guest
it is volcanologist professor Tamsin
Mather I know yeah so we've already
painted a base coat anyway so we should
probably show people what's on first of
all that your left town that Michaela to
knee pain that you to show you and this
is called mint condition
I'm going to picture last field trip
involving a volcano so there's the sky
that the volcano will be against okay
and some other magical technology okay
which organs in a museum
okay so I've gone for a similar theme of
sky because it's right hand and actually
is a white fern sort of interesting
thing that I'm going
which I'm here about later and then goes
through sort of gray to the dark blue
which is kind of like volcano ash
through to space colored through the
atmosphere volcanoes are kind of like
really interesting you loser different
ways because probably most people think
of them as being natural hazards and you
sort of think of destruction
yeah and disruption destruction and
disruption to people's lives or worst
case scenario loss of life and that's
right true that disruption destruction
and death d cubed but then they're
actually also really useful resources so
Iceland for example a really significant
amount of their power is actually
generated from geothermal power Ethiopia
where we do a lot of or have been doing
a lot of our work recently we're looking
at the way that the water hot water
basically flows through the volcano so
that you can then tap into that make
electricity but then they've also played
a really key role in the evolution of
our planet
so in lots of lots of different ways so
you know volcanic environments all of
the firth environments that are
potential candidates for the first
molecules of life volcanic gases have
helped to maintain our atmosphere but
then also when we get these really
heightened periods of volcanic activity
that can cause really big biological
changes so when life has started like
the mass extinction events for example
yeah so I like I like studying volcanoes
because I just really interested all
those different aspects and how those
different aspects fit together it's
funny how much cross over lake there
actually is between our three fields
right so it's your molecular biology
which is sort of the tiny life yes you
can come from from volcanoes and then so
we've got the crossover with sort of
that the formation of planets and their
the effect that then volcanoes can have
an atmosphere is like Venus's atmosphere
like IO that was fear you know this is
space volcanoes yeah that can sort of
change upon its atmosphere and no I had
a student working or studying Venus at
Chevy yes
so I when I was younger I wanted to be
an astronomer and astrophysicist the
line you were gonna get swayed by
anything so how do you actually like
study about cater without cuz he
obviously can't go into a volcano cuz we
died presumably yeah I know that certain
those different types of volcanoes
everything but like how do you actually
study it like what what date did you
collect to do it
well lots and lots of different types
about it look data so you said here we
call go because because we'd I was
actually true you wouldn't go into an
active volcano right now for very
obvious reasons but then you have
ancient systems that have become extinct
themselves and then sometimes they get
kind of cut in half by different
different processes what about like
current volcanoes like how do you
actually study those for now I'm getting
too close um so some of the techniques
we use would be I mean you're looking at
all sorts of different clues the
volcanoes are giving us so if they're
trying out rocks you might take some of
those wrongs I've got a chest full of
them just over here absolutely you can
basically go and then bring those back
and have a look at them and see what
sort of crystals you got in there and
see what other sort of clues that gives
you but then you can also put
instruments out on the ground so
seismometers are really key data
straight data source that we use you put
if you're lucky put several around the
volcano if you don't have so much
resource then it might just put one and
then you look at the very very small
earthquakes but the volcano is making
and I guess I look a bit like taking the
pulse of the volcano so it's like when
gas or magma which is what the core lava
when it's in the inside the earth when
they when it when it when they move they
give a little sort of pop beat if you
like I think they supply breaks anyway
that's not my hobby is so much nice and
so basically this seems like the stomach
but happy yeah and then sometimes you
know the the law is forcing its way
through cold rock and then that rock is
breaking and that gives you a different
type of stomach Rumble yeah offbeat
whichever way we're going with this -
and then you can take those those
measure those signals and then try and
look for patterns in them and make sense
and you know the very basic level it's
just a matter of you know how how fast
is art beauty or how Gergely is the
stomach you must so um so say you're at
that on the very basic level is it quiet
or is it is it making some noise but
then if it is making noise what's that
noise telling us what well where where's
this magma going where's the gas going
what's happening what's gonna happen
next
of course volcanoes you know you you can
look at what they look like in the
visible and you know what we can see but
also heat is really really important in
terms of both volcanoes so you could
look in changes in in the infrared part
of the spectrum so you can look at
changes in terms of their thermal
signature so whether whether it's again
increasing decreasing where the hot
spots are and things like that and you
do that from space as well as ground
base and then you can also look at
weather changing in shape is that what
this is so Rambo yes I was going to come
on to that so that's actually then
another way we can do it is using radar
satellites this is the output from a
radar satellite but I was drawn to this
immediately because I'm in my final of
colors so this isn't something I'm gonna
definitely do on your now it's just the
white one yes
I'm gonna try and recreate this and have
a satellite as well as my plan because I
walked into the office and was like but
so how like this makes you just said
it's radar just bounce back so the radar
satellite goes on it so it goes goes
around the earth and it sends a radar
down and the bounces off the surface and
comes back up again and it looks at the
phase
satellite records what you know you say
you know you've got the peaks and the
troughs little bit like since they're a
bit like on the on the surface of the
ocean you've got peaks and troughs and
the the satellite records you know are
we in are we at a peak or are we a
trough are we halfway yeah
then say a few weeks later it comes back
and it sends it covers over the same
places on the planet that since the beam
would beam down again and it records
again yes part of the of the wave
because if it's in the same place you'll
get like this is like it's like a a
contour map if you like of the
defamation so the closer these the
closer these like pretty rainbow
patterns are together the more the more
the change in the shape is okay the
surface of the planet next we'll be
talking a bit about kind of how you tell
what's going on underneath the volcano
another thing you can use to tell what's
going on underneath volcanoes how much
gas is coming out because as as my
stomach rumbles so we're gonna go to
body other body noises
volcanoes are Earth's a cuticle so I say
you go from the bottom of a swimming
pool to the top you can feel like the
pressure - yeah and sometimes your ears
pop for example so that is because those
those less fluid there's less liquid
above you and the same thing happens
inside the volcanoes if you're going to
eat within the volcano from a plumbing
system to shallow the pressure drops all
the magma and this means that some of
the gases that are dissolved in the
magma start coming out and in forming
bubbles so it's a bit like you know if
you've got a bottle of coke or and you
when you when you take the cap off you
like release the pressure on the coke
good yeah you get all the the gas
starting to come out so if you've got
magma again coming from deep within the
earth to shallow and pretend if you were
up you you get the you get gas coming
out and that finds its way out sometimes
through just through cracks in the urn
and that gives us it gives us another
clue why'd she got some volcanoes that
are acting from really really long
periods of time where active for really
really long periods of time and then it
becomes a so different difference bunch
of different scientific questions that
come into play some are about like you
know if you've got a lot of ash in that
bloom where the ash is gonna go and
unlike with the Icelandic eruption a
couple years ago was it
I can't I remember you can you say why
not perfectly but I can but I can do
something that anywho so the ash where
the ash goes yes sir so one of the
things that we're interested is if we
get another well it not it's already
Iceland but in some part of the world
another eruption like that with the
potential to really disrupt a space
doing doing a better job seller actually
being able to monitor predict where the
ash clouds going to go mm-hmm so the
minimize so that the community can
basically minimize the impact on
everyone's travel plans the airline
industry and but also obviously
ultimately keep people safe hmm so
that's one that's one a spending
environmental imperative
yeah so it's gonna say but then the
gases also have big environmental
impacts as well so it's not so much the
ash but if you get really gas gas rich
guess rich plumes Nichols acid rain all
the qualities or first death yeah so
you've got this lucky son love Li
cocktail of stuff that comes out of a
volcano so waters a big component which
is actually isn't too much of a problem
because we've got lots of water and your
atmosphere already it's quite variable
again it's quite variable so you know
what it's not a big big impact having
like a lot of new water per ton to the
atmosphere it can be a bit more if it
gets high up in the atmosphere but the
next the next normally the next most
common mist the next evasive gases
carbon dioxide so again we've got quite
a lot of carbon dioxide in our
atmosphere but we are quite interested
to know how much is coming out of
volcanoes
it helps yeah well it helps us to give a
context for how
mankind is putting out okay so when
people are like what is it really just
nature is it my kind is that good that
sort of like here's the comparison and
wait we could be you're putting it over
tipping point kind of thing yeah so you
know people will try and make the
argument off okay let's put out okay say
a much carbon dioxide than what we're
doing is negligible there's no evidence
that's the case good best estimates are
about like a hundred times less calm
darkside coming out of the world's
volcanoes then what what human activity
if you think about the sheer scale of a
volcano and let you think that's those
like pictures of the Icelandic volcano
eruption mats and Helen's everything
like the fact that we can put out a
hundred times more than I think that
puts into perspective to people in terms
of like okay here's your everyday thing
in the manufacturing world together and
airplanes like it's a hundred times like
all volcanoes he's just ridiculous yeah
I think that she is what we need
volcanoes as well because the carbon
dioxide the volcanoes have put out have
kept things and balance so if you
switched off of also like Mars you don't
have any significant volcanic activity
these days and the atmosphere is eroded
away mm-hmm and anything you've got
you've got very very cold surface
temperatures yeah
so we do need some we want some carbon
dioxide in the air just not too much
yeah we want yeah the happy spot between
Mars and Venus that's right
so you you're starting gas in action so
this says ash yeah collected by drone
yessir own so I yeah about 10 days ago
back I got back from strongly mentally
which is a volcano just was a north east
of Sicily mmm
so seafloor into Sicily and then you
take a hydrofoil over and it's in these
beautiful islands called the Ionian
islands which are gorgeous hmm
so we were there the reason we were
there is that strongly put some small
ash plumes out when we were there as
back once every 10 minutes of the flash
volume of different sizes were gone and
they've had a couple recently they've
had a couple of rather large rather
large ash creams they called paroxysms
which have been a little bit more yeah
which would be a little bit less some
kid a little bit more concerning yeah so
we were what we were that we wanted to
use again infrared spectroscopy so
looking at the thermal image of the
action so the ash is hot when it comes
and the ash is hot compared to the dark
eternity of space and that's what would
you do is to use that information that
comes out of the infrared spectra the to
tell us more about the ash that's coming
out of the volcano okay I want to do
more learning about doing it from close
by a volcano could do a better job from
satellites when a big eruption the
bigger eruption light goes off faster
but guys really really long distances in
order to do a better job at satellite
remote sensing - so so what we're doing
is we were measuring infrared spectra
from the ashy please and then we also
had some drones with us and we want to
collect ash from the same uh she blooms
so that now we can say that we can make
measurements of them as you back in the
lab so you can see there yes from the
actual thing to what you see these
spectra yes so that we say yes this is
what we are this is what we know is
there this is what we thought we had
from looking at these spectra and do it
yeah have we done a good job she said
it's like the Ashley so what we did is
zubur the only way we get into the plume
and these was was using a drone and
actually it was really challenging to
get thrown into the into the volcanic
plume because it's quite a dynamic
environment any yeah I know good to try
and recreate my spare anything so are
you doing something actually no no no
this is Stromboli right you sent me a
picture of it it has a little you can
just see a little ash and I'm now going
to attempt to paint this here drone so
this is this
done by a guy called Chris a Magister
University of Manchester yeah
and essentially what he did so we need
to it's we need to wear collecting the
ash this was our first attempt including
a including a Hoover bag and we flight
into the drone annex which leave Iran I
think that the dream was mainly in the
plume from the northeast crater okay but
there was other activity could be right
yes well that's what all went means
wounded and I just I just love like the
high technicality of this you've got
like a Hoover bag that I imagine you
could just pick up anywhere and it's
covered over with gaffer tape
yeah nice truck when people are amazing
quickly yeah when people are saying why
are we spending so much money on stuff
just right seriously literally like tax
Palin's well that will hopefully yield
information we have to grab the flights
that costs of billions of again but what
I know the same one but and then there's
like all the Doomsday Preppers who need
to get ready for the big one movies at
Yellowstone yeah or are there other no I
think from I watched I'd very nearly
became a volcanologist i watch this not
like one documentary program and they
already let proper reels you in and it's
all about Yellowstone I think it was
just like a general natural disasters
that could yeah completely just or the
USA or something and one of them was one
of the ones one of the Canary Islands
you know and like if it went off the
collapse the entire side of the island
send this massive
tidal wave that could completely destroy
the eastern seaboard like what is
potentially more likely it would go in
stages okay like one massive
catastrophic yeah if you so what's the
most spectacular volcanic events that
you have window sequester and all that
best field trip maybe I guess that's a
good question Jeremih PhD I went to
Chile for six weeks and we're working
both in the higher Atacama so again
Hawaii and the highest camera sort of
weird hookup where you talk you beat
astronomers you know but we have to put
it on the highest place in the highest
place I've been using both by volcanoes
right that's right yeah so so it's
always this sort of funny funny culture
imagine that the volcanologist like
trooping backers like sunset show
process so you have to do a lot of like
climbing and stuff to get to these
places like controls because they're
they really varies actually so the we
just talked about the hi-hat economy
work um there was called Glasgow
volcanus it's quite a nice tennis um San
Pedro de Gama and it's it's five and a
half kilometers altitude right so and we
why we did climb that and we did carry
equipment and that was one of the
toughest things I was probably the
toughest physical thing I had done it
sounds prior to childbirth
[Laughter]
they're puzzled aloud to the defense of
the birth they say so that that was
really really tough and done was
obviously it was carrying the stuff but
it was also be the altitude is really
tough but then you get other volcanoes
like masaya volcano in Nicaragua um
that's that's it's only six hundred
about 600 meters above sea level yes and
actually there's a right way to the top
so you couldn't you know it's not really
you've got certain is Mossad in
Nicaragua you've got some month yes I'm
really really traditional looking
volcanoes your proper kind of cones
sticking up above the landscape and
their karai cure but Maasai you could
easily drive past it without really
there's too much so it really really
buries actually in terms of how
physically demanding it is and then of
course if you do exactly remain
sentencing you could do that sit at your
desk that's not too Dewar dear - yeah I
mean the heart the fieldwork in the high
Atacama was probably once the most
spectacular discuss the special Amazing
Race
it's quite asked what remains from were
sleeping in a local in in this village
till our prey we were staying in that
schoolhouse because it was during their
summer holiday it was the time to come
village I think it's a maybe sixty to
eighty inhabitants do you have to do
much with like locals in terms of
l'ducation well no but well yeah that
as well but I'm just thinking like do
any of the local inhabitants around
these volcanoes see them as like sacred
and yeah well lots of different levels
actually and I mean first thing is that
never going to come true without making
contact with local Geological Survey and
the local scientists and the local the
local scientists have so much to offer
in terms of they know their but their
volcanoes better than anybody else on
the whole and of course the Geological
Survey is often the where the buck stops
in terms of managing any hazards
from from the volcanoes so we're always
working or at least working the
knowledge of whom local agencies and
artists hopefully working with them
because that's the the best thing yeah
and then yeah we will do lots of
different degrees about really so some
places like when we work here in
Ethiopia
well the postdocs who was here at Oxford
at the time organized a big fund right
fundraising campaign from an equal
school near where we're working I went
in and did some very specific outreach
to local school also fund your
fundraising to get our solar panel put
in so they had the electricity in the
school so you know there's there's lots
of lots of different degrees degrees of
stuff I always say I think the biggest
lake draw for science honestly the
travel like you get to travel to so many
different places that you would
otherwise never go and you interact with
the communities they're in a totally
different way yeah exactly as I say work
here with the local scientists always a
real highlight for me we're in Ethiopia
we we often they we often get taken care
of master students from Addis Ababa
University come out into the field with
us in school so it's really interesting
learning about them and one of the one
of the students just started a PhD with
a colleague of mine in Belgium and
really exciting to sort of make those
connections as well but you asked you
about some well spiritual beliefs
mankinis so when we were first just to
give you example when we went to work on
Kilauea volcano in Hawaii one of the
park rangers took us to do a this is
wonderful it was a really small ceremony
in honor of the goddess of the volcano
Pelin by the halima mile crater which is
a sacred site I think in in native and
Native Hawaiian and so you know I think
we we took we took like each took a
flower and like threw it into the crater
and she she said she said some words in
in
I didn't need two for one there was it's
actually something I really appreciated
that we did that we did it because
because it was culturally sensitive to
do it but actually I really appreciated
doing it's worth when you go and work on
these these volcanoes they are forces of
nature and it's worth taking that Paul's
just to remember that they are to be
respected areas and also how important
they have been in local cultures yeah
okay so what I have done is created the
little story of the interferogram
picture so we start with the little
satellite in space over here so it's a
little CubeSat and the gold is the
little solar panels in the satellite and
then we've got the waves coming off the
satellite the radar that's being pinged
down to earth which my nail art skills
weren't good enough
so you keep it all the same wavelength
so they get slightly redshift did
hilariously but we'll ignore that and
then on the thumb I've tried to recreate
this in interferogram but I think it's
really cool and you got a whole a
topcoat on it just to make it shiny a
space for thought why not show you gonna
be distracted in meetings yeah and then
on my hand okay so what you have here is
a couple of volcanologists starting out
on a very lovely day and they're looking
at this here Henry the vacuum cleaner
drove you can just see the little bag
hanging down that's lighting up the ash
and then this is Stromboli here and then
just on the edge there which is totally
accurate to the photo there's just a
little gas and ash plume there and then
there and then there just seem continues
there so this is the point where we get
you to basically choose your favourite
we help you out by giving you a little
sort of like how would you mark sort of
out of five first of all we were talking
about this look abilities how many times
you be like in there Esther day and then
the second one is scientific accuracy
okay so let's start with my hand how
would you rate this on look a bit a
movie just the whole hand
oh yeah other thing is you know together
just like it's
sparkly okay I get to give you a five
for sparkly look ability yes okay and
then what about scientific well I'm a
little troubled about the rush if you're
gonna do anyway not shiny no you're
right not shiny bits there's some very
nice touches what did I give you phone
gave me a full public ability but I'm
also I love the drone
I love the drone with the proper Hoover
back the fact that you were careful not
to put the vent not at the highest point
of Stromboli
oh yeah so I'm so saying a four or five
I think first one to fake accuracy I
think I'm going to say for Hall which
pips me to the post by half but we will
also ask people to cut in the comments
which was their favorite and they can
vote and we can see if the people agreed
so that wraps up another episode of
nailing science thank you very much to
Tam Ximena joining us though my pleasure
this afternoon and letting us subject
you to this nail polish a thon Palooza
yeah
are your thumbnails in favourites if you
want to hear more from Tamzin then I
will link her website below which has
links to all of the podcasts you've been
on and the raw society lectures that
you've done as well which is all about
volcanoes how they lead to extinction
level events so the dinosaurs involved
in that zone which is always fun and you
don't infinite monkey cage before that's
right yeah and you don't podcast at
Oxford sparks yes so lots of different
things you guys for both you want to
hear more about volcanoes yep thank you
and we will see you next time for more
scientifically accurate now up over on
out of its box
[Laughter]
you